>> Alex Grey is a cult
hero among many people
in the spiritual community for
his shockingly vivid artistic
depictions of what a human
looks like energetically.
He paints women
giving birth, couples
making love, babies,
and other subjects
with a freaky kind of aliveness.
Alex says that his work is
to help people understand
that they are not
their bodies alone,
and that we're all connected
to a vast web of life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
You took an incredibly
unconventional path
to your mind expansion and
your discoveries in your 20s.
With the energy people
have in their 20s,
what advice would you give them?
What is their charge
in terms of utilizing
that for the betterment of
themselves or the whole?
>> Well, I think that
the questioning--
I don't know the depth
of the questioning that's
coming to people.
What was coming to me
was probably starting out
about self-inquiry.
Who am I?
What am I supposed to do here?
How can my artwork--
which I'd already
decided I was an artist--
how can my creative work serve a
higher purpose than just simply
myself?
And so I think that the various
wisdom traditions give us
some tools.
We have thousands of years
of history of meditation
and what that's done to help
people center themselves, get
back into their heart
source, and to see
how they're connected with
everyone, essentially,
and that consciousness is
the medium that moves us.
We have to become familiar with
what that is in our own lives,
and what does it mean to bring
consciousness to our actions?
>> You went about
it, in one way,
very atypical and typical way.
You had all of the energies
of someone 20, 21 years old,
and you explored everything.
You went to the North Pole.
You shaved half your head.
You did everything that a
person that's seeking would do.
What is there about that
magical energy of the 20s
that can be done historically if
you're speaking to that group?
>> Well, I think that since
everything comes into question
and you begin to doubt all
of the bull that you've been
handed by a superficial culture,
then it's the time for greatest
invention and breakthrough--
and potential
break down as well.
But those difficult lessons,
I suppose-- confronting
the things that we most fear.
Usually, we don't quite
have a family yet,
and we may be just
working on getting
a job, or something like that.
So we're kind of at a
point where whatever risks
you can take with your life--
like Julia Butterfly Hill.
She's a great
example of somebody
who saw the deforestation
and did something about it,
and brought attention--
worldwide attention-- to
deforestation and to how one
individual--
working with a support group--
can make a difference in just
making a gesture or a statement
toward a greater
conscience for humanity,
because that seems
to be where it's at.
If we're heading
toward a shutting
down of the web of life
because of the actions
that are polluting and
destroying and upsetting
the balance of
nature, what can we
do, as individuals, to
act locally as we're
thinking on a global scale?
It's a time of
tremendous creativity.
So they have to vision in
the wildest ways possible,
take themselves to extremes
to get in touch with what
it is that they can
contribute to making the world
a better, more peaceful place.
>> Now let's take it a little
more to the other extreme.
You have the boomers,
who, to an extent,
appear to have bought into
a lot of the previous ways
of consumption,
waste, et cetera.
How do you go about speaking to
that group to inspire them to--
in essence, teach an
old dog new tricks?
When people become comfortable
with the wastefulness
of this particular culture,
how do you make them care?
What would you say to
them to make them care?
>> Think of your grandchildren.
Think of your kids.
Think of the kind
of world that we
want to leave for the
generations coming.
And do the boomers want to be
remembered as the generation
that could have done something,
but didn't, toward the slide
into self-destruction that--
we're at somewhat
critical times, I feel.
>> Can you expand on that?
>> Well--
>> Your vision of how critical
it truly is at this time.
>> Well, I think that
Mother Earth will heal from
practically any wound.
It will be like a blip on
the timescale cosmically.
But if we want to stay around
for another 1,000 years
and excel as a species,
I think that we're
at that troubled
time of adolescence--
not quite in our 20s yet--
as a species, where consumption
and addiction to oil
and a variety of
other things is--
there's no moral center, it
doesn't seem, to our actions,
to the way that we treat nature.
We don't see our
connectedness with everyone
and with everything.
And so the simple reverence
for life and morality of love
and the ethic that makes us want
to bring benefit to the world
rather than extract whatever
we can during our brief sojourn
here--
that's what I think
that the wisdom
traditions and the meditation
naturally brings about--
is reclaiming that center
of compassion, and hopefully
wisdom, that will allow us
to bring creative action
into play, and
really may help us
at this kind of "tippy" time.
We're sitting here
with our broadband
and the technological
advances that
are astonishing, and
truly important to making
the global consciousness dawn.
We have to find ways of
flying under the radar
of corporate media that
have their own agenda,
and look toward the agenda
of what would bring the most
benefit to the most people
and the most beings on Earth?
And as I was saying,
that naturally
starts to dawn in people
when they look inside
and find that source of
wisdom and compassion
that's been the
mystic core that is
seen through the various
wisdom traditions.
>> What is the anomaly
that's occurring at this time
in history--
that's creating the new
paradigm, or the need
for the new paradigm?
>> Well, I think
it's an awakening
to our interconnectedness.
It's an understanding
of the meshwork
of being from a very
personal standpoint.
It used to be that the mystics
were very few and far between,
and that their insights were
regarded as somewhat mad.
To say, "Thou art that" is
to have a basic confusion.
No, you're not the same
as the swimming pool
or the truck that's driving by.
But on a deeper and
more fundamental level,
there is a sense of connection.
And certainly, in
the web of life,
we wouldn't be sitting
here a gibbering collection
of molecules if it weren't for
the cosmos evolving just as it
has for the billions
of years that
brought us to this point of
evolutionary concrescence.
And so to be in touch with
one zone-- impermanence--
and to consider what actions
one can take creatively,
and what talents we all have--
because we're all born with
certain innate talents that
we have to realize and use--
and to consider the whole
"bodhisattvic" ideal,
which is basically
that you're here
to bring benefit to the world.
The influence of the Tibetan
Buddhist approach has been
profound in my life and my art,
and I've tried to integrate--
as far as possible-- this
"bodhisattvic" ideal of--
it's a vow to bring liberation
and benefit to all beings.
And if you're vowing to bring
liberation to all beings,
does that include the ants, too?
Gee, whiz.
That's an awesome vow, and
it transcends one lifetime,
really.
And so if you can bring
a bit of that motivation
to your artwork, or to
any creative endeavor,
or to your voting,
or however you best
can serve the greater
good, I think that that's
a very sturdy ethical basis.
And I think that that's
one of the places where
we have to recalibrate.
Certainly in contemporary
art, the question
of morality and
ethics and things
like that rarely comes up.
I suppose it's a whipping boy,
or something, for the Hollywood
that, every once in a while,
gets trotted out in Congress.
What's too violent, or
what's too sexy or something?
But it's not really an
issue in contemporary art,
because there's no
real central mythos
to America besides capitalism.
And so the art world
has become filled
with commodity merchants,
just like the shopping malls.
And so partly what
I'm trying to do
is reframe the way
that we look at art,
and that's why we started
this Chapel of Sacred Mirrors.
That was the point--
to create a space that was
not determined by a museum
or by considering the
artwork as a commodity--
so it's not a
commercial gallery.
So we do what we can.
>> What is it that the groups
Nirvana, and Beastie Boys,
and now Tool have
found in your work?
What is it that's
inspiring them?
>> Well, one of the, I think,
great things about those
particular performers--
certainly the Beastie
Boys and Tool--
was that you see, in the
arc of their development
as artists, that
there's an increasingly
deeper and spiritual message
that is coming through
in their work.
It's not like they can't
also channel rage and humor,
but that isn't the
central point of the work.
With the Beastie Boys,
it wasn't just fighting
for your right to party anymore.
It was about integrating
the Bodhisattva's vow
into an amazing
coalescence of the world
wisdom and incredible beats.
And so with Tool, they're this
extremely hard, heavy metal,
driving, inventive art rock
group that is bringing,
I think, a profound
and direct message
to thousands, maybe
millions of young people.
I love their work.
I was very proud and honored
to be associated with it.
According to Adam,
the guitar player--
who's also their
visual designer--
I worked with him on all
the different projects,
from the CD to the
music video that I
did with them, to the various
stage banners and things.
And in our conversations, he had
given "The Mission of Art" book
that I had written
to his bandmates,
and they had found value in it.
And so I think that
they see themselves
in a position in culture to
affect people on a deep level.
It's a shamanic kind of
relationship, I think.
The rock and roll performers
are, for better or worse,
the shaman of our culture.
And so they can take people to
a place of just entertainment
and keep it on a pretty shallow
level, or go pretty deep.
And a number of them do.
>> When you enter your gallery,
it says, "Surrender to love"
across the top of the entryway.
Why surrender to love now?
>> Well, that's what the
voices told me to do.
When I was on ayahuasca
down in Brazil,
I got a few interior design
tips from whatever voices--
whatever source you'd
say that that was.
But the most important
message they gave me,
right off the bat,
was surrender to love.
Surrender to love.
You've got to love yourself
in order to love anyone else,
and in order to love the world.
When we surrender to
love, we give up the right
to righteousness and
to our strong-faced
and "stiff-necked-ness."
It makes us vulnerable
to the world,
and able to see things
from another perspective,
and we open ourselves to
the infinitude of this--
what I believe to be--
our ground of being, which
is that ocean of love
bliss, and our God nature.
I think love is the
secret name of God.
And so instead of
saying surrender
to God, which would have
seemed, somehow, too forceful
and demanding, by saying
surrender to love,
we all still have a hope
that love is there for us
somewhere in life, whether
it's on a very physical level,
or a very spiritual level.
And so the whole
place was really--
it wouldn't be there if it
weren't for my wife, Allyson.
She inspired the
Sacred Mirror series,
a number of the works in
there about our relationship--
just kissing and
copulating and pregnancy
and our daughter, and
everything like that.
So it's a place to renew
one's association with what
makes life worth living.
And I think love's
primary in that.
>> Your relationship with
your wife seems really primal
to what you've learned about
interconnectedness with other
human beings, souls,
the planet, et cetera.
Any final comment
regarding that?
>> No.
On an LSD voyage that
we had back in 1976,
Allyson and I both
melted down into what
we came to call the
universal mind lattice,
and that was a sense of
total interconnectedness
with all beings and things
in this web of love energy.
And so for us, that is
the ground of being.
That's what everyone inherently
is at their essential cores--
this, basically, ball of,
fountain, and drain of
love energy.
And so trying to present this
sense of interconnectedness
on many different
levels and from
the many different dimensions
is what our art became about.
It changed our lives.
And so I would say, just--
you got to get to
the core of truth
by whatever means necessary,
and then live that truth.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Aside from publishing
his artwork, lecturing,
and writing on cosmic
issues of the time,
Alex has the Chapel of Sacred
Mirrors and Microcosm galleries
in New York.
Check out his website below
and enter a world of imagery
so powerful it can
change your view of what
it is to be human forever.
Until next time,
thanks for watching.